federalist 76
the appointing power of the executive
from the new york packet
tuesday april 1st
hamilton
to the people of the state of new york
the president is to nominate and by and
with the advice and consent of the
senate to appoint ambassadors other
public ministers and consuls judges of
the supreme court and all other officers
of the united states whose appointments
are not otherwise provided for in the
constitution but the congress may by law
vest the appointment of such inferior
officers as they think proper in the
president alone or in the courts of law
or in the heads of departments the
president shall have power to fill up
all vacancies which may happen during
the recess of the senate by granting
commissions which shall expire at the
end of their next session
it has been observed in a former paper
that the true test of a good government
is its aptitude and tendency to produce
a good administration
if the justness of this observation be
admitted the motive appointing the
officers of the united states contained
in the foregoing clauses must when
examined be allowed to be entitled to
particular commendation
it is not easy to conceive a plan better
calculated than this to promote a
judicious choice of men for filling the
offices of the union and it will not
need proof that on this point must
essentially depend the character of its
administration
it will be agreed on all hands that the
power of appointment in ordinary cases
ought to be modified in one of three
ways it ought either to be vested in a
single man or in a select assembly of a
moderate number or in a single man with
the concurrence of such an assembly the
exercise of it by the people at large
will be readily admitted to be
impracticable as waving every other
consideration it would leave them little
time to do anything else
when therefore mention is made in the
subsequent reasonings of an assembly or
body of men what is said must be
understood to relate to a select body or
assembly of the description already
given
the people collectively from their
number and from their dispersed
situation cannot be regulated in their
movements by that systematic spirit of
cabal and intrigue which will be urged
as the chief objections to reposing the
power in question in a body of men
those who have themselves reflected upon
the subject or who have attended to the
observations made in other parts of
these papers in relation to the
appointment of the president will i
presume agree to the position that there
would always be great probability of
having the place supplied by a man of
abilities at least respectable
promising this i proceeded to lay it
down as a rule that one man of
discernment is better fitted to analyze
and estimate the peculiar qualities
adapted to particular offices than a
body of men of equal or perhaps even of
superior discernment
the sole and undivided responsibility of
one man will naturally beget a livelier
sense of duty and a more exact regard to
reputation
he will on this account feel himself
under stronger obligations and more
interested to investigate with care the
qualities requisite to the stations to
be filled and to prefer with
impartiality the persons who may have
the fairest pretensions to them
he will have fewer personal attachments
to gratify than a body of men who may
each be supposed to have an equal number
and will be so much the less liable to
be misled by the sentiments of
friendship and of affection a single
well-directed man by a single
understanding cannot be distracted and
warped by that diversity of views
feelings and interests which frequently
distract and warp the resolutions of a
collective body
there is nothing so apt to agitate the
passions of mankind as personal
considerations whether they relate to
ourselves or to others who are to be the
objects of our choice or preference
hence in every exercise of the power of
appointing to offices by an assembly of
men we must expect to see a full display
of all the private and party likings and
dislikes partialities and antipathies
attachments and animosities which are
felt by those who compose the assembly
the choice which may at any time happen
to be made under such circumstances will
of course be the result either of a
victory gained by one party over the
other or of a compromise between the
parties in either case the intrinsic
merit of the candidate will be too often
out of sight
in the first the qualifications best
adapted to uniting the suffrages of the
party will be more considered than those
which fit the person of the station in
the last the coalition will commonly
turn upon some interested equivalent
give us the man we wish for this office
and you shall have the one you wish for
that
this will be the usual condition of the
bargain and it will rarely happen that
the advancement of the public service
will be the primary object either of
party victories or of party
negotiations the truth of the principles
here advanced seems to have been felt by
the most intelligent of those who have
found fault with the provision made in
this respect by the convention they
contend that the president ought solely
to have been authorized to make the
appointments under the federal
government but it is easy to show that
every advantage to be expected from such
an arrangement would in substance be
derived from the power of nomination
which is proposed to be conferred upon
him while several disadvantages which
might attend the absolute power of
appointment in the hands of that officer
would be avoided
in the act of nomination his judgment
alone would be exercised and as would be
his sole duty to point out the man who
with the probation of the senate should
fill an office his responsibility would
be as complete as if he were to make the
final appointment
there can in this view be no difference
between nominating and appointing the
same motives which would influence a
proper discharge of his duty in one case
would exist in the other and as no man
could be appointed but on his previous
nomination every man who might be
appointed would be in fact his choice
but might not his nomination be
overruled i grant it might yet this
could only be to make place for another
nomination by himself the person
ultimately appointed must be the object
of his preference though perhaps not in
the first degree
it is also not very probable that his
nomination would often be overruled the
senate could not be tempted by the
preference they might feel to another to
reject the one proposed because they
could not assure themselves that the
person they might wish would be brought
forward by a second or by any subsequent
nomination
they could not even be certain that a
future nomination would present a
candidate in any degree more acceptable
to them and as their dissent might cast
a kind of stigma upon the individual
rejected and might have the appearance
of a reflection upon the judgment of the
chief magistrate it is not likely that
their sanction would often be refused
where there were not special and strong
reasons for the refusal
to what purpose then require the
cooperation of the senate
i answer that the necessity of their
concurrence would have a powerful though
in general a silent operation it would
be an excellent check upon a spirit of
favoritism in the president and would
tend greatly to prevent the appointment
of unfit characters from state prejudice
from family connection from personal
attachment or from a viewed popularity
in addition to this it would be an
efficacious source of stability in the
administration
it will readily be comprehended that a
man who had himself the sole disposition
of offices would be governed much more
by his private inclinations and
interests than when he was bound to
submit the propriety of his choice to
the discussion and determination of a
different and independent body and that
body an entire branch of the legislature
the possibility of rejection would be a
strong motive to care and proposing the
danger to his own reputation and in the
case of an elective magistrate to his
political existence from betraying a
spirit of favoritism or an unbecoming
pursuit of popularity to the observation
of a body whose opinion would have great
weight informing that of the public
could not fail to operate as a barrier
to the one and to the other
he would be both ashamed and afraid to
bring forward for the most distinguished
or lucrative stations candidates who had
no other merit than that of coming from
the same state to which he particularly
belonged or of being in some way or
other personally allied to him or of
possessing the necessary insignificance
and pliancy to render them the
obsequious instruments of his pleasure
to this reasoning it has been objected
that the president by the influence of
the power of nomination may secure the
complacence of the senate to his views
this supposition of universal finality
in human nature is little less an error
in political reasoning than the
supposition of universal rectitude the
institution of delegated power implies
that there is a portion of virtue and
honor among mankind which may be a
reasonable foundation of confidence and
experience justifies the theory it has
been found to exist in the most corrupt
periods of the most corrupt governments
the finality of the british house of
commons has been long a topic of
accusation against that body in the
country to which they belong as well as
in this and it cannot be doubted that
the charge is to a considerable extent
well founded
but it is as little to be doubted that
there is always a large proportion of
the body which consists of independent
and public-spirited men who have an
influential weight in the councils of
the nation
hence it is the present reign not
accepted that the sense of that body is
often seen to control the inclinations
of the monarch both with regard to men
and to measures
though it might therefore be allowable
to suppose that the executive might
occasionally influence some individuals
in the senate yet the supposition that
he could in general purchase the
integrity of the whole body would be
forced and improbable a man disposed to
view human nature as it is without
either flattering its virtues or
exaggerating its vices we'll see
sufficient ground of confidence in the
probity of the senate to rest satisfied
not only that it will be impracticable
to the executive to corrupt or seduce a
majority of its members but that the
necessity of its cooperation in the
business of appointments will be a
considerable and salutary restraint upon
the conduct of that magistrate
nor is the integrity of the senate the
only reliance the constitution has
provided some important guards against
the danger of executive influence upon
the legislative body it declares that no
senator or representative shall during
the time for which he was elected be
appointed to any civil office under the
united states which shall have been
created or the emoluments whereof shall
have been increased during such time and
no person holding any office under the
united states shall be a member of
either house during his continuance in
office
publius